20 The Langevin Diffusion in Continuous Time
Definition 1.3.1. Let X and Y be complete separable metric spaces, and consider a cost functional
𝑐: X ×Y →[0,∞]. The optimal transport cost from 𝜇∈P(X)to 𝜈∈P(Y)with cost 𝑐is
T𝑐(𝜇,𝜈)B inf
𝛾∈C(𝜇,𝜈)
∫
𝑐(𝑥,𝑦)𝛾(d𝑥,d𝑦), (1.3.2)
where C(𝜇,𝜈)is the space of couplings of (𝜇,𝜈), i.e., the space of probability measures
𝛾 ∈P(X ×Y)whose marginals are 𝜇and 𝜈respectively.
A minimizer in this problem is known as an optimal transport plan.
An equivalent probabilistic formulation is that T𝑐(𝜇,𝜈)is the infimum of E 𝑐(𝑋,𝑌)over all pairs
of jointly defined random variables (𝑋,𝑌)such that 𝑋 ∼𝜇and 𝑌 ∼𝜈.
Theorem 1.3.3 (Existence). If the cost 𝑐is lower semicontinuous, then an optimal transport
plan always exists.
Proof One can show that the functional 𝛾 ↦→
∫
𝑐d𝛾is lower semicontinuous and that C(𝜇,𝜈)is
compact, where we use the weak topology on P(X ×Y). It is a general fact that lower semicontinuous
functions attain their minima on compact sets. □
Historically, optimal transport began with Gaspard Monge who considered the Euclidean cost
𝑐(𝑥,𝑦)B ∥𝑥−𝑦∥on R𝑑×R𝑑 (Monge, 1781). Moreover, he considered a slightly different problem in
which, rather than searching over all couplings in C(𝜇,𝜈), he restricted attention to couplings which
are induced by a mapping 𝑇 : R𝑑 →R𝑑 satisfying 𝑇# 𝜇=𝜈; this is known as the Monge problem. In
the probabilistic interpretation, this corresponds to a pair of random variables (𝑋,𝑇 (𝑋))with 𝑋 ∼𝜇
and 𝑇(𝑋)∼ 𝜈. The physical interpretation of this additional constraint is that no mass from 𝜇be split
up before it is transported, which may be reasonable from a modelling perspective but leads to an
ill-posed mathematical problem. Indeed, there may not even exist any such mappings𝑇, as is the case
when 𝜇=𝛿𝑥 places all of its mass on a single point and 𝜈does not. Consequently, the solution to the
Monge problem remained unknown for centuries.
The breakthrough arrived when Leonid Kantorovich formulated the relaxation of the Monge problem
introduced in Definition 1.3.1, which is therefore known as the Kantorovich problem (Kantorovitch,
1942). As the product measure 𝜇⊗𝜈always belongs to C(𝜇,𝜈), we at least know that the constraint
set is non-empty, and Theorem 1.3.3 shows that the Kantorovich problem is well-behaved. Moreover,
the Kantorovich problem is actually aconvex problem on P(X×Y); indeed, the objective is linear and
the constraint set C(𝜇,𝜈)is convex. Hence, one can bring to bear the power of convex duality to study
the Kantorovich problem (historically, this study was actually the origin of linear programming).
Although a large part of optimal transport theory can be developed in a general framework as above,
for the rest of the section we focus on the case 𝑐(𝑥,𝑦)B ∥𝑥−𝑦∥2 on R𝑑 ×R𝑑 for concreteness.
Definition 1.3.4. The 2-Wasserstein distancebetween 𝜇and 𝜈, denoted 𝑊2 (𝜇,𝜈), is defined via
𝑊2
2 (𝜇,𝜈)B inf
𝛾∈C(𝜇,𝜈)
∫
∥𝑥−𝑦∥2 𝛾(d𝑥,d𝑦). (1.3.5)
Write P2 (R𝑑)B {𝜇 ∈P( R𝑑)|
∫
∥·∥2 d𝜇 <∞}for the space of probability measures on R𝑑
with finite second moment.
